MiniLM SMS extraction — revision 3

Purpose: improve exact recovery of numeric and random letters-only verification
codes while rejecting tracking references, receipts, expired credentials, support
IDs and other non-verification messages. All 30 configured languages are covered.

Final result on the new frozen test: letters-only recovery 95.67% (3,444/3,600),
overall recovery 95.42%, precision 93.56%, and 550 false positives among 8,400
no-code messages (6.55%). Recovery exceeded 95%; the 99.5% precision target FAILED.
Letters-only recovery exceeded 95% in 22/30 languages. Lowercase-only recovery was
95.00%, mixed-case 95.67%, uppercase-only 96.33%. These are synthetic results.

The selected compact model is 140,352,237 bytes: per-row INT8 word embeddings and
FP16 encoder matrix storage, with FP32 encoder computation. The constant casts
can expand encoder weights back to FP32 when loading, so file size is not working
memory. Standard dynamic INT8 quantization reduced validation recovery to 89.13%;
per-row embeddings plus INT8 encoder weights reached 92.43%. Keeping floating-point
encoder computation retained 96.90% validation recovery at 99.51% precision.
The 140 MB export matched the 183 MB version's validation metrics and was selected.

selection.json records weights, decoder, tokenizer, inference-source and dataset
hashes BEFORE the new test was opened. Final test hashes match that selection.
No weights, thresholds or inference code were adjusted after inspecting test
results. The held-out failures are principally vouchers incorrectly treated as
verification codes (397 cases) and ambiguous pairs of login codes (127 cases).
Further training based on those failures requires another untouched test set.

This revision continues fine-tuning the v2 checkpoint. The v3g run has 28,350
training messages. It replays 87 template families across all 30 languages and
adds eight families in 12 languages with validation gaps. The added examples
cover device pairing, account recovery, ownership verification, obsolete keys,
shipment tracking and support interactions. Matched instruction pairs distinguish
commands that authorize access from commands that look up packages, reservations,
support requests or invoices, without relying on explicit reference labels. In 80% of
training messages, an account-access clause is included independently of the
label. Another complete, locally scoped non-code clause is added in 60% of cases,
and a short distractor in 30%. Sentence order and separators vary. This trains the
model to distinguish a code's purpose even when unrelated text mentions login. Random letter strings are used for negative references
as well as valid codes. V3d fine-tuned all parameters. Later runs continue from the selected checkpoint and
freeze the vocabulary embeddings while fine-tuning the encoder and heads.

MiniLM now shares its encoder between span extraction and a separate code-presence
output. The presence output uses the CLS and masked mean representations and adds
769 parameters. Its binary loss includes both positive and negative messages;
span loss applies to positive messages. Inference still uses one encoder pass.
V3d adds a 385-parameter token-validity output. Each token learns whether it
belongs to the valid code, including explicit negative supervision for references
and obsolete credentials. Inference uses the mean validity logit over the selected
span as its acceptance score, with a validation-calibrated threshold and span
margin. The message-presence loss remains an auxiliary training objective.
No additional encoder pass is required.

Validation revealed a separate decoder bug: SentencePiece sometimes includes the
final digit and punctuation in one token, such as "2.". The decoder now trims
boundary punctuation within tokens while retaining exact source character spans.
This prevents rejecting complete numeric codes or returning shortened separated
codes. Regression tests cover letters, leading zeroes and multilingual punctuation.

The first v3 experiment used 63,840 messages and the original span/null architecture.
It failed the validation precision/recall tradeoff and was stopped after two full
epochs. Its artifacts remain under artifacts/minilm-v3/ with experimentStatus.json.
No new test predictions were made for that run. The v3b run added the presence
head but still failed validation after two epochs and was stopped. V3c continues
from its selected epoch-one checkpoint with stronger contrastive compositions.
V3c still rejected almost all validation messages at the precision target. Its
raw span recall was 97.4%, but unrelated tracking and support references were too
often accepted. V3d therefore continues from the v3c checkpoint with token-level
validity supervision. V3d also failed the validation tradeoff after three epochs. V3e added 16 distinct message families per language but also failed validation.
A counterfactual diagnostic showed that removing account-related boilerplate did
not fix the error: bare instructions such as finding a shipment with a value were
accepted, whereas explicitly labelled references were rejected. V3f targets that
sentence-format shortcut with matched positive/negative instruction pairs.
Its best checkpoint, with the punctuation fix, recovered 90.08% of validation codes
at 99.50% precision. A diagnostic of six confidence-score combinations was also
recorded; the best recovered 92.94%, still below the goal. V3g continues from those
weights using targeted paired examples rather than selecting a weaker precision
target. All refinements are validation-informed; the new
test remained separate until final selection. Failed attempts remain available
with their status and validation data.

The new validation split has 7,560 messages across 12 held-out families; the new
test split has 16,800 messages across 16 held-out families. Each test language has
280 valid-code messages and 280 no-code messages, including 120 letters-only
cases. The split is global across translations. Generated positive code values
are also disjoint, including from the previous checkpoint's data.

data/v3Freeze.json records evaluation hashes before training. Regenerating data
refuses to overwrite changed validation or test content. Training reads training
and validation only. Weight selection, threshold calibration and any choice among
ONNX exports use validation. The final new test is evaluated only after selecting
the candidate. Subsequent improvements informed by its errors need another new
test set, not a claim of fresh evaluation on the same exposed examples.
The root formatter excludes data/v3/*.json to preserve the original template
bytes recorded in initialTemplateHashes.

The earlier v2 evaluation informed which categories needed more training. Its
sentence families are now included in v3b training with newly generated codes, so
the old evaluation is development material and cannot demonstrate unexposed
generalization. Comparisons between v2 and v3g must use the same NEW frozen test
set. Both decoders are calibrated on the new validation set, with old model weights
unchanged. Both use the corrected punctuation decoder. New validation/test bytes
match the pre-training v3 freeze exactly.

Run from this directory after following usage.txt for the isolated Python setup:
  .venv/bin/python revisionData.py --enriched --contrastive --more-paraphrases --matched-pairs --targeted-refinements
  HIP_VISIBLE_DEVICES=0 .venv/bin/python -m pytest testSmsModel.py testTrainingRecovery.py -q
  HIP_VISIBLE_DEVICES=0 .venv/bin/python trainModel.py --config experimentV3g.json --data-dir data/generated/v3-targeted --initial-checkpoint artifacts/minilm-v3f/checkpoint --output artifacts/minilm-v3g --epochs 3 --save-every 250
  HIP_VISIBLE_DEVICES=0 .venv/bin/python evaluateModel.py --run artifacts/minilm-v3g --split validation
  .venv/bin/python exportModel.py --run artifacts/minilm-v3g --row-embeddings
  HIP_VISIBLE_DEVICES=0 .venv/bin/python evaluateModel.py --run artifacts/minilm-v3g --backend onnx --split validation --model-name model.compact.onnx --output-tag compact

The generation commands above describe the experiment and require a fresh output
directory when repeating training. The supplied run is already frozen. Export
creates all candidate formats; model.compact.onnx is the selected source. In the
supplied run, its exact bytes and calibrated decoder have been copied to the
legacy runtime filenames model.int8.onnx and decoder.json, and export.json records
the matching checksums. The original INT8 candidate is model.standard.int8.onnx.
The default filename does not mean all operations execute in INT8.

The --save-every option saves model, optimizer, scheduler, batch position and RNG
state atomically. If interrupted, repeat the training command with --resume to
continue from recovery.pt. A regression test verifies that interrupted/resumed
training reaches identical final weights and optimizer state. Recovery runs use a
separate shuffle generator seeded by seed + epoch.

These commands produced the final evaluation of the supplied selected candidate:
  HIP_VISIBLE_DEVICES=0 .venv/bin/python evaluateModel.py --run artifacts/minilm-v3g --backend torch
  HIP_VISIBLE_DEVICES=0 .venv/bin/python evaluateModel.py --run artifacts/minilm-v3g --backend onnx
  HIP_VISIBLE_DEVICES=0 .venv/bin/python evaluateModel.py --run artifacts/minilm-v2 --backend onnx --comparison --data-dir data/generated/v3-targeted
  .venv/bin/python benchmarkModel.py --run artifacts/minilm-v3g
  .venv/bin/python renderReport.py --run artifacts/minilm-v3g --output-dir reports/v3 --baseline artifacts/minilm-v2/comparisons/v3-targeted/test.onnx.json
  .venv/bin/python packageModel.py --run artifacts/minilm-v3g

The comparison mode saves new baseline results and thresholds under comparisons/;
it does not overwrite v2's original evaluation or its local inference decoder.
ONNX evaluation uses one unpadded SMS per run, matching extractCode.py.

Try the new selected model locally:
  .venv/bin/python extractCode.py --run artifacts/minilm-v3g --text 'Your verification code is qXaBpL.'

Limitations: the corpus is synthetic and assistant-translated, with no independent
native-speaker review or real customer messages. Repeated templates and translated
families make examples correlated. Passing a synthetic benchmark is not sufficient
to establish production accuracy. Physical 4 GB Android memory and latency remain
unmeasured. This revision does not change the Android app or publish any model.
